What glories we have heard of mighty kings
Who ruled the Danish folk in days of yore;
The prowess in those noble princes' deeds!

Like Shield, a son of Sheaf, who from his foes
In many tribes would seize the mead-hall seats
And terrify the earls. Though first he was
A foundling, destitute, his fortunes changed
For good, as greater in the world he grew,
And wealth he won, until the neighbour tribes
Beyond the orca-way were made to kneel
And pay him tribute. That was a good king!

In later years an heir was born to him,
A scion of the house whom God had sent
As comfort to the people, for He saw
The woe that they had suffered, leaderless
So long. For this, to him the Lord of Life
And King of Glory gave the world's acclaim,
So Beow was renowned as heir to Shield,
His story spread across the northern lands.

(A man, when he is young, should do good deeds
And share his wealth while in his father's house
So in old age, his friends will come and fight
Beside him willingly in future wars
And serve him faithfully. Through noble acts
A man will prosper everywhere he goes.)

Then Shield upon his destined hour died;
Still full of strength, he went to God's embrace.
His boon companions bore him to the surf
And sea, as he had bidden them before
When he still wielded words, the Shieldings' friend,
Beloved longtime ruler of the land.

Down at the port there stood, with rounded prow
And outward bound, the prince's icy boat;
Down in the vessel's hold they laid their lord,
This noble giver of the rings, a man
So mighty, by the mast. Great wealth there was,
And shining armour brought from distant shores.

I never heard of any finer ship
So dressed in weapons, clad in war-attire,
In biting blades and mail. Upon his breast
A trove of treasures lay, to drift with him
And follow far the power of the flood.

No less the gifts with which they furnished him,
The riches of a land, than others did
Who sent him forth when he was newly born,
An infant all alone upon the waves.

They set a golden banner, last of all,
High overhead; they left him to the tide,
And gave him to the deep, with heavy hearts
And minds in mourning. None who live can say
In truth—no hero under heaven, none
We hear within the halls—who found that freight.